= Rasem

rasem is a pure ruby gem that allows you to describe your SVG images in ruby code.

== Why Rasem

* Did you ever want to visualize some data in a nice image?
* Do you want to draw a complex image that is easier to describe using a code?
* Would you like to power your HTML 5 site with nicely drawn SVG images?
* Do you need to generate nice images from your ruby code?
* Are you fed up with using DIVs and Javascript to draw simple graphs?
* Is your server overwhelmed with sending PNG images that can be described in a few bytes using SVG?

Rasem allows you to generate SVG images that can be easily exported to other
formats and embed in an HTML 5 page.

== Features

* Draw basic elements: line, rectangle, rouned rectangle, circle, ellipse, polygon and polyline.
* Use SVG styles such as stroke-width, opacity and fill.
* Use SVG transformations such as translate, scale, rotate, skewX/Y and matrix
* Create SVG groups for better editing in SVG editors.
* Create SVG paths using ruby blocks
* Use definitions to create shapes and reuse them in your image
* Create SVG gradients
Coming features:
* Include all SVG standard elements such as filters
* Create default rake and thor tasks to convert your .rasem files to .svg.
* Embed other images in your SVG image
* Output to more formats such as PNG.

Rasem is still in alpha release. Please report your bugs so that we can work on it.
You are welcome to contribute to the project by adding more features and fixing bugs.
The end goal of the project is to fully support SVG standard and make it easy to use.

== Installation
  gem install rasem

== Usage
There are two main methods to generate images with Rasem.

=== Command line
Create a file with extension .rasem. Here is a sample file test.rasem
  self.width = 100
  self.height = 100
  circle 20, 20, 5
  circle 50, 50, 5
  line 20, 20, 50, 50

Save this file and execute the command
  rasem test.rasem

A file test.svg will be generated.

=== Ruby code
You can generate the image from your ruby code. This has several uses such as
sending the image on the fly from a Rails application.

Here is a simple example
  require 'rasem'
  img = Rasem::SVGImage.new(:width=>100, :height=>100) do
    circle 20, 20, 5
    circle 50, 50, 5
    line 20, 20, 50, 50
  end
  
  puts img.output

img.output is the SVG code generated for this images.

== More Examples
The following examples are for .rasem files. These are actually ruby
scripts that are executed to generate the image. So, you can write arbitrary
ruby code in .rasem files as you will see.

simple_graph.rasem
  nodes = [[10,10], [20,20], [10,20]]
  radius = 3
  with_style :fill=>"white", :stroke=>"black" do
    for node in nodes
      circle node.first, node.last, radius
    end
  end
  
  line nodes[0].first, nodes[0].last, nodes[1].first, nodes[1].last,
    :stroke=>"blue"

Here is a more sophisticated example.

tictactoe.rasem
  self.width = 150
  self.height = 150
  board = [['x', 'o', 'x'],
           ['o', '-', 'o'],
           ['x', 'o', 'x']]
  def draw_x(x,y)
    group :stroke=>"red" do
      line x-20, y-20, x+20, y+20
      line x-20, y+20, x+20, y-20
    end
  end

  def draw_o(x,y)
    circle x, y, 20, :stroke=>"blue", :fill=>"white"
  end

  group :stroke=>"black" do  
    rectangle 0, 0, 150, 150, :stroke_width=>2, :fill=>"white"
    line 50, 0, 50, 150
    line 100, 0, 100, 150
    line 0, 50, 150, 50
    line 0, 100, 150, 100
  end

  board.each_with_index do |row, row_index|
    row.each_with_index do |cell, column_index|
      if cell == "x"
        draw_x row_index * 50 + 25, column_index * 50 + 25
      elsif cell == "o"
        draw_o row_index * 50 + 25, column_index * 50 + 25
      end
    end
  end



Here are some examples that show how you can generate images from your ruby code.

You can generate SVG and store it to file
  img = Rasem::SVGImage.new(:width => 100, :height => 100)
  img.line(0, 0, 100, 100)
  

  File.open("test.svg", w") do |f|
    img.write(f)
  end

You can use pass a block to SVGImage.new to make things more compact
  img = Rasem::SVGImage.new(100, 100) do
    line(0, 0, 100, 100)
  end
  # Image is closed automatically
  # Write to file

You can make your code even more compact by passing the file as a last argument
to SVGImage.new
  File.open("test.svg", "w") do |f|
    Rasem::SVGImage.new({:width => 100, :height => 100}, f) do
      line(0, 0, 100, 100)
    end
  end


You can use transformations on created objects (translate, scale, rotate, skew, matrix)

  img = Rasem::SVGImage.new(:width => 100, :height => 100) do
    circle(0, 0, 10).translate(50, 50).scale(2, 1.5)
  end


Here is an example showing how to generate a path using ruby code.

  require 'rasem'
  
  width = 100
  height = 200
  
  img = Rasem::SVGImage.new(:width => width, :height => height) do
    path("stroke" => "black") do
      moveToA(0, height / 2.0)
      vlineTo(height / 2.0 - 50)
      curveTo(50, 40, 0, 0, 50, 0)
      curveTo(-30, -50, 0, 0, 10, -30)
      vlineTo(-(height / 2.0 - 60))
    end
  end
  
  File.open("path.svg", "w") do |f|
    img.write(f)
  end


Using definitions and reuse them later

  img = Rasem::SVGImage.new(:width => 100, :height => 100) do
    defs do
      group(:id => "group1") do
        circle(0, 0, 20)
        text(0, 5, :fill => "red") { raw "hi!" }
      end
    end
  
    use("group1", :x => 50, :y => 25)
    use("group1", :x => 50, :y => 75, :fill => "blue")
  end


Ruby method def_group to use definitions. It create a group inside 'defs' with the given id and populate it using the block. The second optional argument controls the behaviour if the id is already in use, you can :fail, :update the existing element (and return the new one), or :skip the new one (effectively skipping the block, and returning the existing element).

  img = Rasem::SVGImage.new(:width => 100, :height => 100) do
  
    g = def_group("group1") do
      circle(0, 0, 20)
    end
  
  
    g = def_group("group1", :update) do
      circle(0, 0, 20)
      text(0, 5, :fill => "red") { raw "hi!" }
    end
      
    
    use(g, :x => 50, :y => 25)
    use(g, :x => 50, :y => 75, :fill => "blue")
  end 


An example of gradients usage

  img = Rasem::SVGImage.new(:width => 100, :height => 100) do
  
    r1 = radialGradient("rgrad1") do
      stop("0%", "green", 1)
      stop("100%", "blue", 1)
    end
  
    r2 = radialGradient("rgrad2") do
      stop("0%", "yellow", 1)
      stop("100%", "red", 1)
    end
  
    r2 = radialGradient("rgrad2", {}, :skip) do
      stop("0%", "blue", 1)
      stop("100%", "red", 1)
    end
  
  
    circle(50, 25, 20, :fill => r1.fill)
    circle(50, 75, 20, :fill => r2.fill)
  end



== Contributing to rasem
* Check out the latest master to make sure the feature hasn't been implemented or the bug hasn't been fixed yet
* Check out the issue tracker to make sure someone already hasn't requested it and/or contributed it
* Fork the project
* Start a feature/bugfix branch
* Commit and push until you are happy with your contribution
* Make sure to add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a future version unintentionally.
* Please try not to mess with the Rakefile, version, or history. If you want to have your own version, or is otherwise necessary, that is fine, but please isolate to its own commit so I can cherry-pick around it.

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2011 Ahmed Eldawy. See LICENSE.txt for
further details.

